---
title: "Sensitivity of nEXO to 136Xe Charged-Current Interactions: Background-free Searches for Solar Neutrinos and Fermionic Dark Matter"
collection: publications
category: manuscripts
#permalink: /publication/Xe136_CC
excerpt: 'Isomeric states of \\(^{136}\\)Cs create a unique time-delayed coincident signal in LXe TPCs, which can be used for background rejection on the order of \\(10^{-9}\\), enabling background-free measurements of solar neutrinos and electron-coupling fermionic dark matter.'
date: 2025-06-27
venue: 'PRD (Submitted)'
paperurl: 'https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.22586'
bibtexurl: 'http://gtrichardson.github.io/files/Xe136_CC.bib'
#citation: 'Your Name, You. (2009). &quot;Paper Title Number 1.&quot; <i>Journal 1</i>. 1(1).'
---
We study the sensitivity of nEXO to solar neutrino charged-current interactions, \\(ν_e\\)+\\(^{136}\\)Xe→\\(^{136}\\)Cs∗ + \\(e^−\\), as well as analogous interactions predicted by models of fermionic dark matter. Due to the recently observed low-lying isomeric states of \\(^{136}\\)Cs, these interactions will create a time-delayed coincident signal observable in the scintillation channel. Here we develop a detailed Monte Carlo of scintillation emission, propagation, and detection in the nEXO detector to model these signals under different assumptions about the timing resolution of the photosensor read- out. We show this correlated signal can be used to achieve background discrimination on the order of \\(10^{−9}\\), enabling nEXO to make background-free measurements of solar neutrinos above the reaction threshold of \\(0.668\\) MeV. We project that nEXO could measure the flux of CNO solar neutrinos with a statistical uncertainty of \\(25\\)%, thus contributing a novel and competitive measurement towards addressing the solar metallicity problem. Additionally, nEXO could measure the mean energy of the \\(^7\\)Be neutrinos with a precision of σ ≤ \\(1.5\\) keV and could determine the survival probability of \\(^7\\)Be and \\(pep\\) solar \\(\nu_e\\) with precision comparable to state-of-the-art. These quantities are sensitive to the Sun’s core temperature and to non-standard neutrino interactions, respectively. Furthermore, the strong background suppression would allow nEXO to search for for charged-current interactions of fermionic dark matter in the mass range \\(m_{\chi}\\)= \\(0.668\\)–\\(7\\) MeV with a sensitivity up to three orders of magnitude better than current limits.